Clive wearing has one of the worst cases
of amnesia in the world
I know it's like we did now they're not
the same thing no difference between
dreams and I know sensitive brain has
been totally inactive no dreams and no
thoughts of any kind whatever Clive was
a renowned conductor living in London
when he was struck down by a virus in
1985 parts of his brain were completely
destroyed including his memory however
his ability to play music is unaffected
do you feel different when you play
music I don't know it's like playing
with you lay unconscious you played us
some music about two minutes ago not
known to me I never heard of no sir
Clive's case became known to millions
when a television documentary was made
about him in 1986 alone and Confused in
hospital without his memory the only
person he recognized was his wife
Deborah actually consciousness first I
just wanna find a play how they've been
doing what's being wrong with me
20 years later clive only has a
seven-second memory before his mind goes
blank what has life been like for Clive
and his family
do you know that we're making a film
about you know what's news to me you're
being filmed for television press oh of
course
because you're very famous about 20
years ago a film was made about you oh
yeah just after you became ill called a
prisoner of consciousness and 20 years
on we're making a new film about you
because millions of people watched the
film and wanted to know how you were
good heavens
so millions of people know you we've
been coming to see you for several weeks
yes II know you paid to come here
thankful I've is 67 and lives in a brain
injury unit where he's under constant
supervision
his wife Deborah lives 85 miles away in
Redding his illness has made it
impossible for them to live together for
20 years if Clive went out of the front
door unsupervised unaccompanied he would
have it would be like being separated
from a spaceship it would be like if he
was space walking and the rope broke he
would have no way of getting back ever
it does Clive know his name yes does he
know how old he is no does he know where
you live no no I do does he know your
job no no I do does he know the day of
the week no does he know the date yeah
can you read a book no because he can't
remember the sentence before last can he
watch a film no he'll watch the rugby or
he'll watch the crickets he oh he won't
known is playing or what the score is
but each stroke and each try is
satisfying for him to watch
clive now has islands of memory just as
we can ride a bike or drive a car
without remembering how we were taught
clive can play and respond to music
because his innate musical abilities are
still there and weren't totally
destroyed by the virus deborah visits
clive on average once a month passionate
very loving funny very very comical and
he's very very self-effacing you know he
doesn't want to be a nuisance to anyone
he often apologizes to me and says I
must have been such a nuisance to you
I'm so sorry I mean he knows we might
not remember anything about me but he
knows me so he knows what I'm like and
we're still very much a team I mean it
sounds odd when we see so little of each
other but we have very much a team what
does it mean to you when Deborah comes
to visit heaven on earth arrives and
what does it mean to you when Deborah
can't come and visit well I don't know
I've never been consciousness ever no I
don't know what I've been thinking when
she's not here I'd never seen it before
either no word yes I've never seen any
human being since I've been billed first
for people I've seen in 30 years and if
you're unconscious you didn't like it
much do what does being unconscious mean
same as death no difference in day and
night no thoughts at all they're not the
same and what does love mean just
wearing zero in tennis and everything in
life
I saw everything Clive became ill before
he and Deborah could start a family but
Clive has three children from his first
marriage I thought of my father as a
wonderful person mostly absent because
that my parents split up when I was very
young but when I did see him he was
always very jolly very giving always
laughing and we all missed him never
dared to ask him what my name is I don't
know if that's my fear for him or my
fear for myself I've never asked him
what my name is he knows I'm his son and
he'll always say you should be this tall
because he left home when I was that
tall since his illness Clive has
auditory hallucinations what I struggle
with the most is that the intellectual
Colossus that was my father is reduced
to making word games out of card number
plates you know it's just there's a tiny
fraction of him left now 20 years ago
Clive was a well-known musician
conductor an early music producer for
radio 3
he was a very charismatic conductor he
was working in a field that was just
cutting new ground all the time he would
transcribe from original manuscripts and
recreate the music for a particular meal
that the Duke of Bavaria had with his
mother-in-law and what they wore and
what they had to eat and this was the
music and then he would make a radio
program took all his energy there wasn't
much time to sleep there were no
weekends he poured his whole being into
his work
everybody used to say to him Clive
slow down he couldn't no one had any
idea that Clive was about to become one
of the most extreme cases of amnesia in
the world Clive's descent into brain
damage came frightening Lee quickly one
week in March 1985 when he came home
from work looking flushed and feverish
on Saturday his headache started by
Tuesday he was no better and he hadn't
slept his temperature was 102 by
Wednesday he was very confused and
couldn't remember Deborah's name his
temperature was 104 doctors came and
went and Deborah left him sleeping but
when she came home Clive had disappeared
from their flat I called his name
there was no reply I went into the
bedroom the bed was empty and I knew
something terrible would happened over
the next few hours Deborah rang
hospitals and police stations across
London no one had seen Clive sad and
then a man's voice the phone rang and
the man's voice said are you mrs. Waring
yes
we've got your husband thank God
Clive had gone out fully dressed with
his overcoat and a copy of The Times
under his arm hailed a cab but couldn't
remember where he lived he wanted to go
home and he couldn't remember where he
lived and the cab driver had dropped him
at West Hampstead police station and the
police had chased him by his Barclaycard
so he got there and we we took him home
and live went to walk past the gate and
I stopped him and I said no it's here
and he's it always this way we live and
I said yes
and he didn't recognise the building two
doctors made home visits and concluded
that Clive was suffering from a severe
bout of flu that was doing the rounds in
North London
but the friday morning he wasn't
answering me and i picked up one of his
arms and it was floppy so I'm running
the doctor again I said he's gone
floppy he's gone floppy get here now and
the doctor came took one look alive and
died nein nein nein went out of the
front door walked down the stairs and as
he turned the landing he said this is
the strangest case I've ever seen we got
to the hospital and I just remember
going through these clear plastic rubber
doors they were lack of valve and that
as those doors flap shut behind us you
know it was just like our life as we
knew it was over once Clyde was inside
some Mary's Hospital the doctors fought
to halt his fever and desperately
conducted tests they realized that
Clive's brain was being attacked by the
herpes simplex or cold sore virus
occasionally this virus crosses the
blood-brain barrier and gets into the
brain nobody knows why or how incredibly
rare it happens about it's a
one-in-a-million chance that it's gonna
happen and it caused an inflammation of
the brain which was called in careful
itis from what the doctors said about
how bad the temperature had been and how
ill he'd been I was very concerned that
he wasn't going to live I was I was
fairly convinced that I'd come to see my
dad die
and then he didn't Clive was given a new
drug called acyclovir it saved his life
but came too late to prevent brain
damage the virus had destroyed Clive's
hippocampus an area of the brain crucial
for memory and learning leaving him with
dense amnesia
how many years of I've eaten about 20
about 20 pretty much right so have one
night 20 years long with no dream
that's what's been like just like this
no difference in dead night no thoughts
at all in that sense been totally
painless which is not something which is
very desirable really isn't this is
precisely like death if we have no spent
senses of pain you have no sense of any
kind working either
I don't remember sitting down on this
chair for example all the city as it is
that was unknown to me I've never seen a
human being since I've been that's the
first photograph I see to anybody and
who is that face one of my sons I can't
remember his name
it's gone last time I knew mr. to school
that's how many years it's been a few
years before he would have died from it
and a few years later they might have
spotted it quicker or maybe a different
doctor might have spotted it quicker or
whatever so it was just on the cusp of
that change and then that's you know
he's suffered for that I think in my own
mind it was the question of is it right
that he's been ill for so many days and
how much damage has been done to his
brain in that time and whether it was
the right thing or the wrong thing that
he was treated and everybody fought for
him as much as they did
Clive remained at the Mary's pad
there was nowhere else suitable for him
to go his moods swung from euphoria to
sadness within weeks and confusion and
despair set in he was in severe shock so
he was crying all the time he'd come in
and you say oh hi I'm your son yeah my
son I don't recognize you and then he'd
be crying again and you're just stuck in
that loop for months I said Clive can
you tell me why you're crying and he
said no and I handed him a little
notepad and a pen and I said can you
write it I said just write quickly why
are you crying and he wrote I am
completely incapable of thinking
I don't know he's applied here
look everybody is in the world to do
please please
these messages were recorded on
Deborah's answer phone minutes after she
left him Deborah visited live daily but
he couldn't remember her being
first time I seen a human being every
moment for Clive is the first moment
because the amnesia is rubbing
everything out immediately after it
happens not only does he not remember
anything that's happened to him since he
was ill he doesn't remember anything
that ever happened to him
in the whole of his life he knows about
things he knows that he worked for the
BBC but he does not have any event in
his mind that he can bring to his mind's
eye he knows that we are married he does
not remember the wedding just 7:16 a.m.
first acts well I don't remember a story
first data entry I've made consciously
Clive keeps a diary every day and has
done for 20 years in an effort to make
sense of his life he writes multiple
entries recording his last conscious
moment he would look at his watch to see
what time was this momentous event
occurring a first consciousness and so
he would write down
10:06 awake first time and then had the
same sensation in but 1007 awake first
time truly awake first time ignore the
last entry now I'm awake this is the
first real awakeness and so the the
diaries are line by line a succession of
astonished awakenings that's 1990 when
he'd been suffering amnesia for just
five years and this is the effects on
him seven years on but you can see that
he's by no means resolved his anguish by
no means he writes the time now in big
in a big hand and a tick a tick to say
yes that's authentic I I wrote that it's
authentic that definitely me awake he
has to then cross through the previous
ticks and do a new tick with a circle
around it to say this is the real one
and that wasn't the real one next time
he comes back and so on
so there's a constant desperate series
of scrubbing out all the previous
entries the same now I'm awake now I'm
awake and the pencil just becomes
blurred and it goes on and it's so thick
the pencil it's almost as if he's using
the pencil to dig himself into back into
time to try to fix himself in a
continuum to have more than one moment
at a time but he never can
people's entries in this area rubbish
what does that mean oh no did you write
that I've no conscious - conscious
nozzle no shame you know for the first
time it's is it your handwriting yes I
know nothing burns at all so how do you
think it got there I don't deserve a
doctor don't know but you must know I
haven't seen the book of total now no no
that's mean that means I haven't seen it
so I have no noise over at all
that's all there's no knowledge of that
book the water sometime new to me
but you put I didn't know but now I know
know it om say use integers don't say
I've made as if that a funny thing we'll
use your intelligence
the doctors don't know why Clive's
aggressive outbursts have gradually
stopped that's the least an hour after
dating now and three minutes out of date
yeah first time I've seen my writing
then I see my room first I see human
beings have a dream or a thought the
same thoughts in fact
it says you're here that you your hisses
coughing drinking three minutes past
10:00 that was unknown to me I've never
seen anyone except you three people to
me no one lady
Clive's condition was hard for Deborah
to bear you asked me when did I decide
to divorce him and when did I decide to
leave it wasn't really a decision it was
an imperative
there was no way hey any human being
could continue in that way we had the
same dialogue in a loop tape repeated
verbatim with the same inflection the
same tone the voice the same expression
on the face for well nine that the whole
nine years until I left and we were
still having that conversation as I was
backing out of the room Clive became ill
and hospitalized only 18 months after
marrying Deborah three years after the
virus attacked his brain the strain on
their lives was beginning to show it's
like being a wife and Widow
simultaneously I lost Clive or most of
Clive three years ago because without
consciousness he's in many senses dead
to ease her pain Deborah campaigned for
seven years to find Clive a secure and
permanent home with around-the-clock
care that he needed in 1992 he was
finally moved to a new specialist brain
unit outside London Deborah's mission
was accomplished but she had exhausted
herself and Clive was increasingly
having fits in her presence with no hope
of living together again Deborah
divorced Clive and flew to America
I was in my mid 30s I wanted kids I
didn't want to be on my own all the time
it was very lonely and I thought maybe
having a relationship with somebody else
having kids would help to heal the pain
I rang him up to say hello darling I've
arrived although of course he didn't
know I'd left because he didn't know I'd
ever been there and it didn't really
make any difference where I was he
didn't matter where I was in London or
New York or Timbuktu I tended to fall
for gestured completely impossible
people who are all artists of some kind
and as soon as I came became close to
anybody and had conversations with them
you know the relationship just dissolve
because they weren't alive
basically I was looking for Clive I
guess did he ever ask you when you were
coming home no did he ever ask you what
you were doing no he showed no curiosity
he just wants to let me know that he was
awake he'd say hey tee
when are you coming and I'd say as soon
as I can and then he'd say oh please
come at the speed of light turn at the
speed of light come by helicopter
in 1996 Deborah had to make a choice
whether to remain in America and apply
for permanent residency and a green card
she returned to the UK drawn back to
Clive she settled in Nottingham working
for the brain injury charity headway
Deborah had come full circle and I came
back still not knowing how to live
still with a huge emptiness a great
sucking emptiness inside that could
never be filled
still with a sense of needing to go home
but not have you know where's home
because home was where he was but I
couldn't be with him
I was just going round and M degrees in
circles but it was the same was just
more of the same I'd reached three at
the end of my tether and I rang a friend
and I asked her to pray for me she was
the only Christian I knew and as she was
whispering away to God and I just felt
this extraordinary power coming into me
and I knew that God was in my room I
just had this incredible sense that I
was really really loved I mean so loved
and that emptiness that I had been
trying to fill all those years with
relationships with food with alcohol I
was filled that emptiness was gone
oh Jesus Rita's evil place Clive is
visiting some Ethel Reedus Church in
London for the first time since he
recorded a concert there in 1982 she
music to have the acoustics of the
churches as quite unlike that of a
concert hall yes there's lots of echoes
and long reverberation it's very special
in that way
listen see how quiet it is to some music
in the distance I remember last time we
were here you were conducting the lasas
Requiem
mhm and it was for the last
international lassus festival that you
put on and you came in here and none of
the pews were here and you used the
whole building fukushi you had it was
far from a concert he was actually a
celebration of the mass as if lathers
had just died
it was extraordinary and it was so
moving that there were people here we
were crying yes and it was broadcast
live to five countries and you were
directing it and it was so moving it was
so moving that everyone was in tears
that's how good he is how good its
director and musical director you own
was just live and you gave the audience
whether they were sitting at home
listening to the radio or whether they
were walking around here in the dark
with candlelight flickering you gave
them an experience of something deep and
profound and spiritual and they went
away after your concerts and they were
never the same again
you say that I think that you said our
mothers
save a car driver CC the fine
Clive makes phrases out of the letters
on car number plates as they flash past
guests what my job is Henry United
Nations PR that's amazing
yeah I do that's very clever you astound
me sometimes you take my breath away
I know that you didn't lose your breath
got to stop reading do you know what I
do for a living yes can you see me doing
meaningful stop yeah how is he that's an
exciting life is no different
Debra renewed her marriage vows with
Clive three years ago although they'll
always have to live apart
I never seen hello it's not familiar
then where do you think it is guess
where it mean do you think there's
anyone that do you think you've ever
been here before
there's my initials backwards WDC
what do you think we'll find my militant
alcohol that's hope what do you think
life's been like for your father hell I
can't imagine anything worse must be
really frightening to be constantly
waking up to something that you don't
recognize you know every seven seconds
or however however long that he's he can
remember anything for to turn around and
where am i and you do it again and you
don't know where you are I can't imagine
a thing more frightening must be like a
nightmare really must
Debra is planning a momentous trip for
Clive best public comment if you could
go anywhere where would you like to see
yesterday
home is yesterday next Tuesday
are we going I live in Redding I see
yeah do you think you've ever been to
mating yes I have been yes I mean cause
everything is busy you could have gone
when Howard was studying then yeah I
didn't know you'd ever been there never
mention ready no it's not been tested
because I have a memory of going man
yeah not a very interesting place No
can you name a town in Berkshire I can't
I can't no job do you know where I live
no yes I'm nine kids with are no no
reading oh really yeah
it's Beltronics women reading
clive is going home for the first time
in 13 years you for one year and nine
back of another car remember the phone
number when you're in voice at four
remarkably Clive can still recall
details from his childhood numbers
embedded in his memory before he became
ill there's another guest expected for
lunch Clive's youngest son Edmund who
has not seen his father for seven years
things I used to do with my father
always revolved around his work it was
weird be either going to see getting to
places such as the British Museum for
his research or we'd be going to concert
venues or recording venues we would
often end up in churches and you can
walk into a church or a cathedral
anywhere in Europe and read it like a
book
he had a vast amount of knowledge and
that has just been wiped out it's been a
difficult time seconds before Edmunds
arrival Deborah has Prime Clive to
expect him some friends for that lovely
wife of yours
what does normality feel like to you
know great luxury and something that you
know to be really values and appreciate
it's very precious we haven't had a
family meal for 20 years
tip for what will this day mean to climb
nothing nothing in Lea's conscious
memory I mean even while he's in here he
doesn't know we're here and when he's in
the car he won't know we've been here
and he won't remember anything you know
he doesn't remember anything that's ever
happened in the last 20 years ever what
do you say to Clive when he gets
confused and disorientated how do you
deal with that
but he's disoriented all the time it
doesn't matter because we don't need to
be in time we don't need to be in any
particular place it's worse we're in
we're on another plane Clive and I we're
we're in a world where there is no time
after four hours Debra has to take Clive
back to the brain injury unit I don't
really want to answer that thank you
I was just wondering how the day had
been
well it's just so sad but it's not you
know that's not our reality and it's
just so sad and why have you stayed away
for seven years it's too painful was it
easier to stay away Joanna yeah it was
the easy way out they didn't seem any
point either because he didn't remember
he'd write it in his diary but it turned
over the page and start writing the next
day did you know who you were more or
less he needed to sometimes he'd need a
bit of prompting he's got a quick mind
if friends came up that he didn't
recognize and he understood that he was
supposed to recognize these people
then he would greet them like long-lost
friends and he'd work on on that until
somebody told him what he needed to know
it was always a difficult man to fool
you know and those are the things you
know that I was always pleased to see
because I knew that his mind was working
over time and I knew that that was him
having that it's just a shadow
today clive sister Adele has come to see
him
and I used to take his children to see
him but he used to get pretty aggressive
if he was very angry you know there was
one occasion when I went to see him on
my own
and he he just when I said who I was he
attacked me almost you know grabbed hold
of me very aggressively and the staff
came in and sort of calmed it down but
he'd remembered me when I was younger he
just said no you know you're too old
like when how old do you think and he
went off to see when he was fifteen
years he went to the Merchant Navy yeah
I used to go and visit him and it's just
so difficult and and not easy to talk to
him at all my husband had got no
connection with him found it much easier
he could talk about things that totally
irrelevant and quite happily carry on a
conversation with him but I always found
that extremely difficult thing to do do
you remember Adele sitting next to me
can you remember what she was wearing
I never seen
no such human beings I've seen three of
it two men in one day the first piece
people I've seen since Ivan no no
difference in day and night no thoughts
at all no dreams day and night that same
blank precise like death is it very hard
no he's actually same as being dead
which it's not difficult was it we did
it's easy you don't do anything at all
you can't do anything
you're dead it's been the same exactly
yes I've never been conscious to think
that so I've never been bored or upset
no being same is death no dreams even
day and night the same when you miss
your old life you say yes I miss my old
life what do you miss musician and in
love he'll say things like do you know
what it's like and that's really
dangerous because if you actually did I
said yes I once because I was just
saying yesterday no that was disastrous
yeah and then I said that again scene
why because he says you don't know what
it's like how do you know because he's
right isn't he
yes there's no way you're gonna know
what it's like some fight in him
oh yeah yeah but that's the thing is
probably 3/4 of his personalities still
they're functioning normally
he will analyse what's happened he said
well the doctors must be very interested
in this you know it's very unusual case
he worked it all out over and over again
because he doesn't really remember that
he worked it out an hour ago
Deborah's done more thought-out than any
other single person I very much doubt
that I could have done that for him and
that's hard that's very hard I think I'd
have given up I would like to say when
it was I really can't remember it's too
hard I wanted him to walk me down the
aisle when I got married and he couldn't
I wanted him to know that I had his
grandchildren but he couldn't so he's
he's a lovely person he's he's Clive now
that's gone
considering he's still one of the most
amusing people in the world
he's pretty peaceful considering he
doesn't know where he is or what century
it is oh well what time he got up that
morning or or that he's in a place where
he lives
considering all of that his state of
mind is extraordinarily calm happy
content and very much himself he's
himself if you could do anything now if
you had free choice what would you do
next I would Jim Thomas a cigarette then
of course waiting for time to allude and
disappear and her arrival
there are twenty some muscles on the
side of the face so many many
possibilities of expression in the smile
some people say you smile with your eyes
but this is true because with is my mood
changes of the wrinkles maybe have a
soft pile or a baby laughing so we use
the face when dropping tudi